{:title "Manifold is your friend"
 :layout :post
 :tags ["clojure"]}

I find myself writing async code fairly often.  Whenever I'm calling an external
service, usually using HTTP, I tend to use the async versions of the libraries
that provide it, like [Aleph](https://aleph.io/) or [HttpKit](https://github.com/http-kit/http-kit).
Actually, I like Aleph the most because it integrates nicely with [Manifold](https://github.com/clj-commons/manifold).  That's not a coincidence, they're both written by the same authors.  The
usual go-to solution in the Clojure world when it comes to async programming is
of course [core.async](https://clojure.github.io/core.async/).  I've used it
several times, and since it's so often used, I try to use it whenever the "async
need" arises.  However, time and time again I find myself returning to `Manifold`.

This probably is because `Manifold` is a bit more *Clojure-esque*.  The API is
more idiomatic, they're just functions.  Not those weird `<!` and `>>!` things
`core.async` provides.  Also, I just find it easier to work with.  It allows you
to use `deref` where you want, which is a well-known function and also well
supported by other libraries.  Another big advantage IMHO is that `Manifold`
differntiates between a stream and a "deferred".  The latter is a single value
that may or may not be "realized" in the future.  Usually the functions the
lib provides are a mix of both.  For example, when fetching a value from a stream
using [take!](https://aleph.io/codox/manifold/manifold.stream.html#var-take.21) it
returns another `deferred`.  And very often a stream is not what you want, but
a `deferred` value fits nicely.  In `core.async` they solve this by returning
channels (as it's called there) that only hold one value.  Of course, you could
also do this using `Manifold` but you don't have to.

Also, `Manifold` is a bit less *magic-y*, you can pass `deferred`s to other functions
as arguments etc., where with `go` blocks you have to be more careful.  And,
should it be hard to choose, you can [connect](https://aleph.io/codox/manifold/manifold.stream.html#var-connect)
`core.async` channels to `Manifold` streams!

Just take a look at this example:
```clojure
;; Core async
(require '[clojure.core.async :as ca])

(def c (ca/chan))
;; Write to channel
(ca/go (ca/>! c "test value"))
;; Read it back, ensure it doesn't block forever
(def v (ca/alts!! [c (ca/timeout 1000)]))
;; Now we still have to inspect the result, see which of the channels it returned from
(if (= c (second v))
  (println "Got value:" (first v))
  (println "Timed out!"))
```
Whereas for `Manifold`, it would look like this:
```clojure
;; Manifold
(require '[manifold.stream :as ms])

(def s (ms/stream))
;; Write to stream
(ms/put! s "test value")  ; Also accepts `nil` btw
;; Read it back, ensure it doesn't block
(def v (deref (ms/take! s) 1000 :timeout))
(if (not= :timeout v)
  (println "Got value:" v)
  (println "Timed out"))
```

To me, the `Manifold` code just seems more "natural".  Having to use `alts!!`
just seems clunky to me, with its weird return values.  But of course, YMMV.

So should you ever take a look at [the MonkeyCI code](https://github.com/monkey-projects/monkeyci),
now you know why we use `Manifold` and not `core.async`.