{:title "Stories from the trenches"
 :tags ["clojure"]}

I've been a professional software developer for a quarter of a century now.  And
before that, I was writing code in my room instead of going to college.  And
before *that* I wrote simple applications in Turbo Pascal and C when I was in
high school.  So you might say I've got some coding experience.  Of course, in
those beginner days, there was no internet.  So it wasn't easy to learn from
other people.  Nowadays, the possibilities have much expanded.  But still, from
time to time, I struggle with certain problems.  Ever since I've started writing
functional code (in my case, with [Clojure](https://clojure.org)) I have learned
even more about coding.  Since about a year and a half, I've been working on
[MonkeyCI](https://www.monkeyci.com), a full-blown SaaS, completely written in
Clojure.

And still I'm learning.  I have written several Clojure-based applications in
my previous company, but I've always had trouble with how state is managed.  This
is certainly a common problem in functional programming.  Actually, it's a common
problem in programming *in general*, but functional applications take extra care
to handle state well.  This means, we want to have to do as little as possible
with state.  Ideally, functional code is completely *pure*, with no side effects
whatsoever.  Which is of course unachievable, since applications without side
effects are useless.  But still we try to isolate the "state-part" of the process
as much as we can.  Whole libraries have been written on how to manage state and
side effects, but they remain difficult to handle.

In this blog entry, I'm lumping state and side effects together, but they are
of course completely different things.  State is data that is kept around, and
that may be modified by one part of the code, to be read by another part.  Side
effects are things that have impact outside of your application.  A very simple
example of a side effect is writing to screen.  Or reading input from the user,
or sending queries to databases.  You don't have full control over those things,
and they likely have impact on the state of your application.  For example,
updating a record in the database is a side effect.  But the data in the database
is also state.  But you can also have in-memory state, which is kept inside your
process, and is destroyed when your application exits.

State and side effects are both problematic: they can be modified by other parts
of your application, or even by other applications.  And that makes reasoning
about it difficult, and is very often a case of bugs or instability in your
applications.  Functional programming tries to eliminate uncertainty as much
as possible, by making all code (ideally) "pure", which means it does not have
state and does not do side effects.  But of course, a real life, useful application
requires state and side effects.  It needs input from the user, should return output
back to the user, etc.

The most straightforward way to do this is just make your functions "impure": do
the messy stuff right in your code.  But this makes it difficult to test, and
hard to reproduce problems.  And I have to admit that I, too, have been doing
that in many cases.  Knowing that it was bad practice, but I just didn't know
how to do it any other way.

Until several months ago.  I had known about the [interceptor
pattern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interceptor_pattern) for a long time.  And
I have even used it, from time to time.  Most design patterns are only needed for
object-oriented programming (OOP) and tend to just not be needed when doing
functional coding.  But this is one pattern that is useful for functional
programming.  It already is widely used in HTTP servers, where requests are
received, and a reply should be returned.  You use interceptors to do all sorts
of changes on the input request, like security checks, content negotation, etc.
But it can be used for so much more.  You can write your own interceptors to
fetch information from the database, or save it back after you've set up your
response.

[MonkeyCI](https://monkeyci.com) is an application that also has a HTTP API,
but it's mostly event-driven.  A build is triggered by an incoming webhook, or
when the user manually starts it from the GUI.  But after that, it's all events.
New containers are started, jobs run, and they all send events to inform other
interested parties of their progress and results.  This is where I initially got
stuck.  I couldn't figure out an elegant way to post events in my code.  I kept
falling back to messy `post-event` calls right in the middle of my functions.
Eventually, I was forced to take a step back from the event-driven architecture,
even though I knew it was a bad idea.  But I just didn't know how to solve it.
And many of you may know, but coding is also a creative process.  And you can't
force inspiration, you just have to wait for it to enlighten you.  And inspiration
did come, eventually.  After coding for several months (with ugly side effects) I
finally had the idea to incorporate the interceptor pattern in my event handlers.

Why not push the side effects like starting processes and sending out events to
interceptors?  That's what I did, and it resulted in a major overhaul of the
MonkeyCI code, but the result is worth it.  I also extracted the generic part
of doing event-driven code with interceptors in a separate library, called
[Mailman](https://github.com/monkey-projects/mailman.git).  Check it out, it may
be useful to you too!  In a future post, I'll dive deeper into how to use it and
show you some examples.